1. What is a database?
a) Organized collection of information that cannot be accessed, updated, and managed
b) Collection of data or information without organizing
c) Organized collection of data or information that can be accessed, updated, and managed
d) Organized collection of data that cannot be updated

Answer: c
Explanation: It is defined as an organized collection of data or information for easy access, updating, and management in a computer.

2. Who created the first DBMS?
a) Edgar Frank Codd
b) Charles Bachman
c) Charles Babbage
d) Sharon B. Codd

Answer: b
Explanation: Charles Bachman along with his team invented the first DBMS known as Integrated Data Store (IDS).

3. Which of the following is not a type of database?
a) Hierarchical
b) Network
c) Distributed
d) Decentralized

Answer: d
Explanation: Different types are:
1) Centralized
2) Distributed
3) Relational
4) NoSQL
5) Cloud
6) Object-oriented
7) Hierarchical
8) Network

4. Which of the following is not a function of the database?
a) Managing stored data
b) Manipulating data
c) Security for stored data
d) Analysing code

Answer: d
Explanation: It allows authorized users to update, store, manipulate, or access data. Since data is stored in table format it is easy to access the data and perform the required functions. It also removes duplicate and redundant data.

5. Which of the following is not an example of DBMS?
a) MySQL
b) Microsoft Acess
c) IBM DB2
d) Google

Answer: d
Explanation: MySQL, Microsoft Access, IBM DB2 are database management systems while Google is a search engine. MySQL is a Linux-based database management system, Microsoft Access is a tool that is a part of Microsoft Office used to store data, IBM DB2 is a database management system developed by IBM. Google’s Bigtable is the database that runs Google’s Internet search, Google Maps, YouTube, Gmail, and other products.

6. What is information about data called?
a) Hyper data
b) Tera data
c) Meta data
d) Relations

Answer: c
Explanation: Information about data is known as Metadata. Metadata describes the data in detail by providing additional information like type, length of the data, etc. Metadata helps the user to understand the data.

7. The values appearing in given attributes of any tuple in the referencing relation must likewise occur in specified attributes of at least one tuple in the referenced relation, according to _____________________ integrity constraint.
a) Referential
b) Primary
c) Referencing
d) Specific

Answer: a
Explanation: Consider 2 relations r1 and r2. r1 may include among its attributes the primary key of relation r2. This attribute is called a foreign key from r1, referencing r2. The relation r1 is also called the referencing relation of the foreign key dependency, and r2 is called the referenced relation of the foreign key.

8. _____________ is a hardware component that is most important for the operation of a database management system.
a) Microphone
b) High speed, large capacity disk to store data
c) High-resolution video display
d) Printer

Answer: b
Explanation: Since all the data are stored in form of memory in the disk, a high speed, and large-capacity disk is required for the operation of the database management system.

9. The DBMS acts as an interface between ________________ and ________________ of an enterprise-class system.
a) Data and the DBMS
b) Application and SQL
c) Database application and the database
d) The user and the software

Answer: c
Explanation: A database management system is an application that acts as an interface between the user and the database. The user interacts with the application to access data.

10. ______________ is a set of one or more attributes taken collectively to uniquely identify a record.
a) Primary Key
b) Foreign key
c) Super key
d) Candidate key

Answer: c
Explanation: Foreign key creates a relationship between two relations. Super key is the superset of all the keys in a relation. A candidate key is used to identify tuples in a relation.

11. Which command is used to remove a relation from an SQL?
a) Drop table
b) Delete
c) Purge
d) Remove

Answer: a
Explanation: Delete command is used to delete the existing record from the table. The drop table deletes the whole structure of the relation. Purge removes the table which cannot be obtained again.

12. Which of the following set should be associated with weak entity set for weak entity to be meaningful?
a) Neighbour set
b) Strong entity set
c) Owner set
d) Identifying set

Answer: d
Explanation: Every weak entity must be linked to an identifying entity; in other words, the existence of the weak entity set is contingent on the presence of the identifying entity set. The weak entity set that the identifying entity set identifies is said to be owned by the identifying entity set. Owner entity set is another name for it.

13. Which of the following command is correct to delete the values in the relation teaches?
a) Delete from teaches;
b) Delete from teaches where Id =’Null’;
c) Remove table teaches;
d) Drop table teaches;

Answer: a
Explanation: To delete the entries from the table Delete from table command should be used.

14. Procedural language among the following is __________
a) Domain relational calculus
b) Tuple relational calculus
c) Relational algebra
d) Query language

Answer: c
Explanation: Non-Procedural Languages are Domain relational calculus and Tuple relational calculus. Relational algebra is a procedural language that takes input in the form of relation and output generated is also a relation.

15. _________________ operations do not preserve non-matched tuples.
a) Left outer join
b) Inner join
c) Natural join
d) Right outer join

Answer: b
Explanation: Left outer join returns all the rows from the table that is on the left side and matching rows on the right side of the join. Inner join returns all rows when there is at least one match in BOTH tables. Natural join returns the common columns from the tables being joined. A right outer join returns all the rows from the table that is on the right side and matching rows on the left side of the join.

16. Which forms have a relation that contains information about a single entity?
a) 4NF
b) 2NF
c) 5NF
d) 3NF

Answer: d
Explanation: A table is in its 3rd NF if it has already completed in 2NF, and non-key attributes are not dependent on any non-key attributes. This means that all non-key attributes must depend on primary key. When a table represents a single entity, the primary key will identify the instance row and all attributes in 3NF are dependent on the primary key. So, the primary key in the 3th NF captures the whole information of this single entity.

17. The top level of the hierarchy consists of ______ each of which can contain _____.
a) Schemas, Catalogs
b) Schemas, Environment
c) Environment, Schemas
d) Catalogs, Schemas

Answer: d
Explanation: Schemas represent the logical configuration of the DBMS. Catalogs consist of metadata of the objects and system settings used.

18. _______ indicates the maximum number of entities that can be involved in a relationship.
a) Greater Entity Count
b) Minimum cardinality
c) Maximum cardinality
d) ERD

Answer: c
Explanation: The term cardinality refers to the uniqueness of data values included in a single column (attribute) of a table in SQL (Structured Query Language).

19. The user IDs can be added or removed using which of the following fixed roles?
a) db_sysadmin
b) db_accessadmin
c) db_securityadmin
d) db_setupadmin

Answer: b
Explanation: Along with security, as the name suggests the db_accessadmin role also handles access. db_sysadmin refers to the system administrator. db_securityadmin as the name suggests it involves granting or declining permission to access the data ensuring security.

20. Why the following statement is erroneous?
SELECT dept_name, ID, avg (salary)
FROM instructor
GROUP BY dept_name;
a) Dept_id should not be used in group by clause
b) Group by clause is not valid in this query
c) Avg(salary) should not be selected
d) None

Answer: a
Explanation: Any property that does not occur in the group by clause must only appear in an aggregate function if it also appears in the select clause; otherwise, the query is considered incorrect.

21. After groups have been established, SQL applies predicates in the ___________ clause, allowing aggregate functions to be used.
a) Where
b) Having
c) Group by
d) With

Answer: b
Explanation: In SQL, after grouping data using the GROUP BY clause, the HAVING clause is used to filter the groups based on specific conditions. It allows the use of aggregate functions and selects only the groups that satisfy the given criteria.

22. Which of the following is not the utility of DBMS?
a) Backup
b) Data Loading
c) Process Organization
d) File organization

Answer: c
Explanation: Backup utility is used to create a copy of the db as a backup. Loading utility is used to load existing file. File organization is used to relocate the files and create new access path. Processing is not an utility.

23. What does a foreign key combined with a primary key create?
a) Network model between the tables that connect them
b) Parent-Child relationship between the tables that connects them
c) One to many relationship between the tables that connects them
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: b
Explanation: When the foreign key of one table references the primary key of another table, the foreign key creates a parent-child relationship. The table containing the primary key is considered the parent table where as the table containing the foreign key is considered the child table.

24. Which of the following is correct according to the technology deployed by DBMS?
a) Pointers are used to maintain transactional integrity and consistency
b) Cursors are used to maintain transactional integrity and consistency
c) Locks are used to maintain transactional integrity and consistency
d) Triggers are used to maintain transactional integrity and consistency

Answer: c
Explanation: Pointers are used to access data with great speed and accuracy. Consistency is maintained using locks.

25. Which of the following is correct regarding the file produced by a spreadsheet?
a) can be used as it is by the DBMS
b) stored on disk in an ASCII text format
c) all of the mentioned
d) none of the mentioned

Answer: a
Explanation: For updating the value in ASCII text format, a regular text file is used.

26. What is the function of the following command?
Delete from r where P;
a) Clears entries from relation
b) Deletes relation
c) Deletes particular tuple from relation
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: c
Explanation: In the command the P gives condition to delete a particular tuple.

27. ______ resembles Create view.
a) Create table . . . as
b) Create view as
c) Create table . . .like
d) With data

Answer: a
Explanation: The ‘create table… as’ statement is similar to the ‘create view… as’ statement in that both are defined with queries. The main distinction is that table contents are set when the table is built, whereas view contents always reflect the current query result.

28. The query specifying the SQL view is said to be updatable if it meets which of the following conditions?
a) select clause contains relation attribute names but not have expressions, aggregates, or distinct specification
b) from clause has 1 relation
c) query does not have group by or having clause
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: d
Explanation: To update the view in sql all the conditions must be satisfied.

29. When the “ROLLUP” operator for expression or columns within a “GROUP BY” clause is used?
a) Find the groups that make up the subtotal in a row
b) Create group-wise grand totals for the groups indicated in a GROUP BY clause
c) Group expressions or columns specified in a GROUP BY clause in one direction, from right to left, for computing the subtotals
d) To produce a cross-tabular report for computing subtotals by grouping phrases or columns given within a GROUP BY clause in all available directions

Answer: c
Explanation: A view can be thought of as a virtual table that gets its data from one or more table columns.

30. Which of the following is the best way to represent the attributes in a large db?
a) Dot representation
b) Concatenation
c) Relational-and
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: b
Explanation: Concatenation in DBMS is used to join two or more table fields of the same table or different tables. Example inst sec and student sec.

31. Which of the following is the subset of SQL commands used to manipulate Oracle Structures, including tables?
a) Data Described Language
b) Data Retrieval Language
c) Data Manipulation Language
d) Data Definition Language

Answer: d
Explanation: DDLs are used to define schema and table characters and consist of commands that help in modifying. DML performs the change in the values of the relation.

32. __________ command is used in SQL to issue multiple CREATE TABLE, CREATE VIEW and GRANT statements in a single transaction.
a) CREATE CLUSTER
b) CREATE PACKAGE
c) CREATE SCHEMA
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: c
Explanation: A schema is a description of a system’s structure in a formal language supported by the database management system, and it refers to data organization as a blueprint for how a db is built.

33. Which of the following key is required in to handle the data when the encryption is applied to the data so that the unauthorised user cannot access the data?
a) Primary key
b) Authorised key
c) Encryption key
d) Decryption key

Answer: c
Explanation: The encryption key is used to encrypt the message. Even if the message is intercepted by an enemy, the enemy will be unable to decrypt and interpret the message because he lacks the key.

34. Which of the following is known as the process of viewing cross-tab with a fixed value of one attribute?
a) Dicing
b) Pivoting
c) Slicing
d) Both Pivoting and Dicing

Answer: c
Explanation: Slice procedure takes one dimension from a cube and turns it into a new sub-cube. Dice takes two or more dimensions from a cube and creates a new sub-cube from them

35. For designing a normal RDBMS which of the following normal form is considered adequate?
a) 4NF
b) 3NF
c) 2NF
d) 5NF

Answer: b
Explanation: Because most 3NF tables are free of insertion, update, and deletion anomalies, an RDBMS table is sometimes regarded as “normalized” if it is in the Third Normal Form.

36. Which of the following is popular for applications such as storage of log files in a database management system since it offers the best write performance?
a) RAID level 0
b) RAID level 1
c) RAID level 2
d) RAID level 3

Answer: b
Explanation: RAID level 0 refers to data stripping. RAID level 1 refers to disk mirroring with block striping. RAID level 2 refers to bit-level stripping and RAID level 3 refers to byte-level striping with dedicated parity.

37. Which of the following represents a query in the tuple relational calculus?
a) { }{P(t) | t }
b) {t | P(t)}
c) t | P() | t
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: b
Explanation: A nonprocedural query language is the tuple relational calculus. It specifies the needed information but does not provide a detailed strategy for obtaining it.

38. The oldest DB model is _______________
a) Network
b) Physical
c) Hierarchical
d) Relational

Answer: c
Explanation: Hierarchical database model was developed by IBM in the early 1960s. It had Parent-Child Relationship.

39. Which of the following establishes a top-to-bottom relationship among the items?
a) Relational schema
b) Network schema
c) Hierarchical schema
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: c
Explanation: A data model in which the data is structured into a tree-like structure is known as a hierarchical model. The structure allows information to be represented using parent-child relationships.

40. A major goal of the db system is to minimize the number of block transfers between the disk and memory. Which of the following helps in achieving this goal?
a) Secondary storage
b) Storage
c) Catalog
d) Buffer

Answer: d
Explanation: Every block has a copy on disc, however, the copy on the disc may be an earlier version of the block than the version in the buffer.

41. What happens if a piece of data is stored in two places in the db?
a) Storage space is wasted & Changing the data in one spot will cause data inconsistency
b) In can be more easily accessed
c) Changing the data in one spot will cause data inconsistency
d) Storage space is wasted

Answer: a
Explanation: One of the main features of a database management system is minimum data duplication and redundancy. Hence, is always consistent and so there is no duplication.

42. Consider money is transferred from (1)account-A to account-B and (2) account-B to account-A. Which of the following form a transaction?
a) Only 1
b) Only 2
c) Both 1 and 2 individually
d) Either 1 or 2

Answer: c
Explanation: The term transaction refers to a collection of operations that form a single logical unit of work.

43. A transaction is delimited by statements (or function calls) of the form __________
a) Begin transaction and end transaction
b) Start transaction and stop transaction
c) Get transaction and post transaction
d) Read transaction and write transaction

Answer: a
Explanation: The transaction consists of all operations executed between the begin transaction and end transaction.

44. Identify the characteristics of transactions
a) Atomicity
b) Durability
c) Isolation
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: d
Explanation: Because of the above three properties, transactions are an ideal way of structuring interaction with a database

45. Which of the following has “all-or-none” property?
a) Atomicity
b) Durability
c) Isolation
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: a
Explanation: Either all operations of the transaction are reflected properly in the database, or none are.

46. The database system must take special actions to ensure that transactions operate properly without interference from concurrently executing database statements. This property is referred to as
a) Atomicity
b) Durability
c) Isolation
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: c
Explanation: Even though multiple transactions may execute concurrently, the system guarantees that, for every pair of transactions Ti and Tj, it appears to Ti that either Tj finished execution before Ti started or Tj started execution after Ti finished.

47. The property of a transaction that persists all the crashes is
a) Atomicity
b) Durability
c) Isolation
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: b
Explanation: After a transaction completes successfully, the changes it has made to the database persist, even if there are system failures.

48. __________ states that only valid data will be written to the database.
a) Consistency
b) Atomicity
c) Durability
d) Isolation

Answer: a
Explanation: If for some reason, a transaction is executed that violates the database’s consistency rules, the entire transaction will be rolled back and the database will be restored to a state consistent with those rules.

49. ____ means that the data used during the execution of a transaction cannot be used by a second transaction until the first one is completed.
a) Consistency
b) Atomicity
c) Durability
d) Isolation

Answer: d
Explanation: Even though multiple transactions may execute concurrently, the system guarantees that, for every pair of transactions Ti and Tj, it appears to Ti that either Tj finished execution before Ti started or Tj started execution after Ti finished.

50. The Oracle RDBMS uses the ____ statement to declare a new transaction start and its properties.
a) BEGIN
b) SET TRANSACTION
c) BEGIN TRANSACTION
d) COMMIT

Answer: b
Explanation: Commit is used to store all the transactions.

------------------------------------------SQL QUERIES------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

51.
Name
Annie
Bob
Callie
Derek
Which of these query will display the the table given above ?
a) Select employee from name
b) Select name
c) Select name from employee
d) Select employee

Answer: c
Explanation: The field to be displayed is included in select and the table is included in the from clause.

52. Here which of the following displays the unique values of the column?
  SELECT ________ dept_name 
   FROM instructor;
a) All
b) From
c) Distinct
d) Name

Answer: c
Explanation: Distinct keyword selects only the entries that are unique.

53. The ______ clause allows us to select only those rows in the result relation of the ____ clause that satisfy a specified predicate.
a) Where, from
b) From, select
c) Select, from
d) From, where

Answer: a
Explanation: Where selects the rows on a particular condition. From gives the relation which involves the operation.

54. The query given below will not give an error. Which one of the following has to be replaced to get the desired output?
SELECT ID, name, dept_name, salary * 1.1
   WHERE instructor;
a) Salary*1.1
b) ID
c) Where
d) Instructor

Answer: c
Explanation: Where selects the rows on a particular condition. From gives the relation which involves the operation. Since Instructor is a relation it has to have from clause.

55. The ________ clause is used to list the attributes desired in the result of a query.
a) Where
b) Select
c) From
d) Distinct

Answer: b
Explanation: None

56. This Query can be replaced by which one of the following?

   SELECT name, course_id
   FROM instructor, teaches
   WHERE instructor_ID= teaches_ID;
a) Select name,course_id from teaches,instructor where instructor_id=course_id;
b) Select name, course_id from instructor natural join teaches;
c) Select name, course_id from instructor;
d) Select course_id from instructor join teaches;

Answer: b
Explanation: Join clause joins two tables by matching the common column.

57.
SELECT * FROM employee WHERE salary>10000 AND dept_id=101;
Which of the following fields are displayed as output?
a) Salary, dept_id
b) Employee
c) Salary
d) All the field of employee relation

Answer: d
Explanation: Here * is used to select all the fields of the relation.

58.Employee_id	Name	Salary
1001	Annie	6000
1009	Ross	4500
1018	Zeith	7000
This is Employee table.
Which of the following employee_id will be displayed for the given query?

SELECT * FROM employee WHERE employee_id>1009;
a) 1009, 1001, 1018
b) 1009, 1018
c) 1001
d) 1018

Answer: d
Explanation: Greater than symbol does not include the given value unlike >=.

59. Which of the following statements contains an error?
a) Select * from emp where empid = 10003;
b) Select empid from emp where empid = 10006;
c) Select empid from emp;
d) Select empid where empid = 1009 and lastname = ‘GELLER’;

Answer: d
Explanation: This query do not have from clause which specifies the relation from which the values has to be selected.

60. In the given query which of the keyword has to be inserted?
INSERT INTO employee _____ (1002,Joey,2000);
a) Table
b) Values
c) Relation
d) Field

Answer: b
Explanation: Value keyword has to be used to insert the values into the table.

-------------------------------------------------------VIEWS---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

61. Which of the following creates a virtual relation for storing the query?
a) Function
b) View
c) Procedure
d) None of the mentioned

Answer: b
Explanation: Any such relation that is not part of the logical model, but is made visible to a user as a virtual relation, is called a view.

62. Which of the following is the syntax for views where v is view name?
a) Create view v as “query name”;
b) Create “query expression” as view;
c) Create view v as “query expression”;
d) Create view “query expression”;

Answer: c
Explanation: <query expression> is any legal query expression. The view name is represented by v.

63. SELECT course_id
FROM physics_fall_2009
WHERE building= ’Watson’;
Here the tuples are selected from the view. Which one denotes the view?
a) Course_id
b) Watson
c) Building
d) physics_fall_2009

Answer: d
Explanation: In this SQL query, physics_fall_2009 is the name of the view from which tuples are selected. A view in SQL is a virtual table which can be used to access the data in the same way as a table.

64. Materialised views make sure that
a) View definition is kept stable
b) View definition is kept up-to-date
c) View definition is verified for error
d) View is deleted after specified time

Answer: b
Explanation: None.

65. Updating the value of the view
a) Will affect the relation from which it is defined
b) Will not change the view definition
c) Will not affect the relation from which it is defined
d) Cannot determine

Answer: a
Explanation: None

66. SQL view is said to be updatable (that is, inserts, updates or deletes can be applied on the view) if which of the following conditions are satisfied by the query defining the view?
a) The from clause has only one database relation
b) The query does not have a group by or having clause
c) The select clause contains only attribute names of the relation and does not have any expressions, aggregates, or distinct specification
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: d
Explanation: All of the conditions must be satisfied to update the view in sql.

67. Which of the following is used at the end of the view to reject the tuples which do not satisfy the condition in where clause?
a) With
b) Check
c) With check
d) All of the mentioned

Answer: c
Explanation: Views can be defined with a with check option clause at the end of the view definition; then, if a tuple inserted into the view does not satisfy the view’s where clause condition, the insertion is rejected by the database system.

68. Consider the two relations instructor and department
Instructor:

ID	Name	Dept_name	Salary
1001	Ted	Finance	10000
1002	Bob	Music	20000
1003	Ron	Physics	50000
Department:

Dept_name	Building	Budget
Biology	Watson	40000
Chemistry	Painter	30000
Music	Taylor	50000
Which of the following SQL statements correctly creates a view combining these two relations so that each instructor’s ID, name, and department building are shown?
a)

CREATE VIEW instructor_info AS
SELECT ID, name, building
FROM instructor, department
WHERE instructor.dept name= department.dept name;
b)

CREATE VIEW instructor_info 
SELECT ID, name, building
FROM instructor, department;
c)

CREATE VIEW instructor_info AS
SELECT ID, name, building
FROM instructor;
d)

CREATE VIEW instructor_info AS
SELECT ID, name, building
FROM department;

Answer: a
Explanation: The instructor and department relations must be joined on the dept_name attribute to get building for each instructor.

69. Suppose we have a view defined as:
CREATE VIEW instructor_info AS
SELECT ID, name, building
FROM instructor, department
WHERE instructor.dept_name = department.dept_name;
If we execute:

INSERT INTO instructor_info VALUES ('69987', 'White', 'Taylor');
What will be the values of the attributes in the base relations (instructor and department) that are not included in the view?
a) Default value
b) Null
c) Error statement
d) 0

Answer: b
Explanation: Attributes not specified in the INSERT will take NULL values if no constraints exist; otherwise, the operation fails.

70. Which of the following SQL statements correctly defines a view named faculty that lists the ID, name, and department name of all instructors?
a)

CREATE VIEW faculty AS
SELECT ID, name, dept_name
FROM instructor;
b)

CREATE VIEW faculty
SELECT ID, name, dept_name
FROM instructor;
c)

VIEW faculty AS
SELECT ID, name, dept_name
FROM instructor;
d)

CREATE faculty VIEW AS
SELECT ID, name, dept_name
FROM instructor;

Answer: a
Explanation: The correct syntax is CREATE VIEW view_name AS <query expression>;.

71. Which of the following is the full form of NTFS?
a) New Tree File System
b) New Technology File System
c) New Table File System
d) Both B and C

Answer: b
Explanation: NTFS stands for New Technology File System. It is a file system developed by Microsoft for Windows that supports security, permissions, and large file storage.

72. Total view of a database is known as?
a) Physical view
b) Internal view
c) Conceptual view
d) External view

Answer: c
Explanation: The conceptual view represents the complete logical structure of the database. It shows what data is stored and the relationships between data.

73. Select the correct command to find the number of values in a column.
a) ADD
b) SUM
c) TOTAL
d) COUNT

Answer: d
Explanation: COUNT is used in SQL to count the number of rows or values in a column. It returns the total number of records.

74. Select the correct properties of entities?
a) Table
b) Groups
c) Attributes
d) Switchboards

Answer: c
Explanation: Attributes are the properties or characteristics of an entity, such as name, age, or ID in a student entity.

75. Which of the following operator is used to compare a value to a list of literal values?
a) ANY
b) BETWEEN
c) IN
d) ALL

Answer: c
Explanation: The IN operator is used to compare a value with a list of values. BETWEEN is used for ranges, not lists.

76. What is the use of COUNT in SQL?
a) Returns number of distinct value
b) Returns total values
c) Returns number of groups
d) Returns number of columns

Answer: b
Explanation: COUNT returns the total number of rows or values in a column. It is commonly used to measure the size of data.

77. Select the valid SQL type.
a) NUMERIC
b) CHARACTER
c) FLOAT
d) All of these

Answer: d
Explanation: All listed options are valid SQL data types used to store different kinds of data such as numbers, text, and decimal values.

78. The term ‘FAT’ stands for
a) File allocation tree
b) File allocation table
c) File allocation graph
d) All of these

Answer: b
Explanation: FAT stands for File Allocation Table. It is a file system used to manage how data is stored and retrieved from storage devices.

79. Which of the following can be used to extract or filter data from a data warehouse?
a) Data redundancy
b) Data recovery tool
c) Data mining
d) Both B and C

Answer: c
Explanation: Data mining is used to extract useful patterns and filter relevant information from large datasets in a data warehouse.

80. In case of shutdown before commit, which operation is done automatically?
a) Commit
b) Rollback
c) Savepoint
d) Checkpoint

Answer: b
Explanation: If a transaction is not committed and the system shuts down, rollback is performed to undo changes and maintain database consistency.

81. How is an attribute represented in an ER diagram?
a) Rectangle
b) Diamond
c) Ellipse
d) Circle

Answer: c
Explanation: In an ER diagram, attributes are represented using an ellipse shape, while entities are rectangles and relationships are diamonds.

82. How many levels are there in the architecture of a database?
a) Two
b) Three
c) Four
d) Five

Answer: b
Explanation: A database has three levels of architecture: external level, conceptual level, and internal level. This helps in data abstraction.

83. What is the maximum number of children of a B-tree of order m?
a) m-1
b) m+1
c) 2m
d) m

Answer: d
Explanation: In a B-tree of order m, each node can have at most m children and m-1 keys.

84. NATURAL JOIN can be termed as a combination of which operations?
a) Union and Intersection
b) Projection and Cartesian product
c) Selection and Union
d) Projection and Selection

Answer: b
Explanation: NATURAL JOIN works by first performing a Cartesian product and then applying projection to remove duplicate columns based on common attributes.

85. Which of the following are relational algebra operations?
a) Union only
b) Select only
c) Rename only
d) Union, Select, and Rename

Answer: d
Explanation: Union, Select, and Rename are all relational algebra operations. Relational algebra includes basic operations like Select (σ), Project (π), Union (∪), Set Difference (−), Cartesian Product (×), and Rename (ρ), along with derived operations like Join and Intersection.


86. Which command is used to select some particular columns from a table?
a) Selection
b) Projection
c) Restriction
d) Extraction

Answer: b
Explanation: Projection (π) is used to select specific columns from a table. It removes unwanted columns and keeps only the required ones. Selection is used for rows, not columns.

87. What is the total view of a database known as?
a) Physical view
b) External view
c) Internal view
d) Conceptual view

Answer: d
Explanation: The conceptual view represents the complete logical structure of the database. It includes all entities, attributes, and relationships while hiding physical storage details.


88. What is a table joined with itself called?
a) Cross join
b) Inner join
c) Self join
d) Natural join

Answer: c
Explanation: A self join is when a table is joined with itself. It is useful for comparing rows within the same table, such as finding employees with the same manager.


89. Which of the following can be used to extract or filter data and information from a data warehouse?
a) Data redundancy
b) Data recovery tool
c) Data mining
d) Both B and C

Answer: c
Explanation: Data mining is used to extract useful information and patterns from large datasets in a data warehouse. It helps in analysis and decision-making, unlike redundancy or recovery tools.

90. What is the total view of a database known as?
a) Physical view
b) External view
c) Internal view
d) Conceptual view

Ans. d
Explanation: The conceptual view (also called the logical view) is referred to as the total view of a database. It represents the complete logical structure of the entire database — what data is stored and the relationships among that data — hiding the physical storage details while showing all entities, attributes, and relationships.

91. Which of the following is used to define the structure of a relation?
a) DML
b) DDL
c) DCL
d) TCL

Ans. b
Explanation: DDL (Data Definition Language) is used to define the structure of a relation/table. It includes commands like CREATE, ALTER, DROP, and TRUNCATE that define or modify the schema of database objects.

92. Which of the following is a type of database?
a) Hierarchical database
b) Network database
c) Relational database
d) All of the above

Ans. d
Explanation: All three — Hierarchical, Network, and Relational — are valid types of databases. Hierarchical uses a tree structure, Network uses a graph structure, and Relational uses tables. Other types include Object-oriented, NoSQL, and Cloud databases.

93. What is the purpose of the HAVING clause in SQL?
a) To filter rows before grouping
b) To filter groups after GROUP BY
c) To sort the result set
d) To join two tables

Ans. b
Explanation: The HAVING clause is used to filter groups after the GROUP BY operation. It is similar to the WHERE clause, but WHERE filters individual rows before grouping, while HAVING filters groups after aggregation. For example, HAVING COUNT(*) > 5 returns only groups with more than 5 records.

94. Which of the following is a lossless join decomposition?
a) A decomposition where data is lost after joining
b) A decomposition where the original relation can be reconstructed by joining the decomposed relations
c) A decomposition that increases redundancy
d) A decomposition that violates normalization

Ans. b
Explanation: A lossless join decomposition ensures that the original relation can be perfectly reconstructed by joining the decomposed relations without any loss of information or generation of spurious tuples. It is an essential property of good database decomposition during normalization.

95. What is a deadlock in DBMS?
a) A situation where a transaction waits indefinitely for a resource held by another transaction
b) A type of database index
c) A method of data backup
d) A type of SQL constraint

Ans. a
Explanation: A deadlock occurs when two or more transactions wait indefinitely for resources held by each other, creating a circular wait condition. For example, Transaction T1 holds Resource A and waits for Resource B, while Transaction T2 holds Resource B and waits for Resource A.

96. Which of the following is used to prevent deadlock in DBMS?
a) Two-phase locking
b) Timestamp ordering
c) Wait-die scheme
d) All of the above

Ans. d
Explanation: All three — Two-phase locking, Timestamp ordering, and Wait-die scheme — are used to prevent or handle deadlocks in DBMS. Two-phase locking ensures serializability, timestamp ordering uses timestamps to order transactions, and Wait-die scheme uses priorities to decide which transaction should wait or be rolled back.

97. What is the difference between DELETE and TRUNCATE in SQL?
a) Both are identical commands
b) DELETE removes specific rows and can be rolled back; TRUNCATE removes all rows and cannot be rolled back
c) TRUNCATE removes specific rows; DELETE removes all rows
d) DELETE is a DDL command; TRUNCATE is a DML command

Ans. b
Explanation: DELETE is a DML command that removes specific rows based on a WHERE condition and can be rolled back using ROLLBACK. TRUNCATE is a DDL command that removes all rows from a table at once, cannot be rolled back (in most databases), and resets identity columns. TRUNCATE is faster than DELETE for removing all rows.

98. What is a composite key?
a) A key that consists of a single attribute
b) A key made up of two or more attributes to uniquely identify a tuple
c) A key that references another table
d) A key that allows NULL values

Ans. b
Explanation: A Composite Key is a key that consists of two or more attributes (columns) that together uniquely identify a tuple in a relation. No single attribute alone can uniquely identify the row. For example, in an ORDER_ITEM table, (order_id, product_id) together might form a composite key.

99. Which of the following is true about a candidate key?
a) A table can have only one candidate key
b) A candidate key can have NULL values
c) A table can have multiple candidate keys
d) A candidate key is always a foreign key

Ans. c
Explanation: A table can have multiple candidate keys. Each candidate key is a minimal super key that can uniquely identify a tuple. One candidate key is selected as the primary key, and the remaining ones are called alternate keys. Candidate keys cannot have NULL values.

100. What is a surrogate key in a database?
a) A natural key derived from data
b) A system-generated artificial key used as a primary key
c) A key used to join two tables
d) A composite key with multiple attributes

Ans. b
Explanation: A Surrogate Key is a system-generated artificial key (usually an auto-incremented integer) used as a primary key. It has no business meaning and is created purely for database purposes. Examples include auto-increment IDs like employee_id = 1, 2, 3... It is preferred when no natural key exists or when natural keys are too complex.


101. What is the purpose of the GROUP BY clause in SQL?
a) To filter rows from a table
b) To sort the result set
c) To group rows with the same values in specified columns for aggregation
d) To join multiple tables

Ans. c
Explanation: The GROUP BY clause groups rows that have the same values in specified columns into summary rows. It is typically used with aggregate functions like COUNT, SUM, AVG, MAX, and MIN. For example, GROUP BY department groups employees by their department so that aggregate functions can be applied to each group.


102. What is a non-correlated subquery?
a) A subquery that depends on the outer query for its values
b) A subquery that is independent of the outer query and executes only once
c) A subquery that joins two tables
d) A subquery that uses aggregate functions

Ans. b
Explanation: A non-correlated subquery is independent of the outer query and executes only once. Its result is then used by the outer query. In contrast, a correlated subquery depends on the outer query and executes once for each row processed by the outer query, making it generally slower.


103. What is the purpose of the DISTINCT keyword in SQL?
a) To sort the result set
b) To filter NULL values
c) To remove duplicate rows from the result set
d) To count the number of rows

Ans. c
Explanation: The DISTINCT keyword in SQL is used to remove duplicate rows from the result set. For example, SELECT DISTINCT department FROM employees returns each department name only once, even if multiple employees belong to the same department. Without DISTINCT, duplicate values would appear in the output.


104. Which of the following is an example of a DML command?
a) CREATE
b) DROP
c) INSERT
d) GRANT

Ans. c
Explanation: INSERT is a DML (Data Manipulation Language) command used to insert new rows into a table. Other DML commands include SELECT, UPDATE, and DELETE. CREATE and DROP are DDL commands, while GRANT is a DCL (Data Control Language) command.


105. What is an index in a database?
a) A constraint that enforces uniqueness
b) A data structure that improves the speed of data retrieval
c) A type of SQL join
d) A method of database normalization

Ans. b
Explanation: An index is a data structure (usually a B-tree or hash) that improves the speed of data retrieval operations on a database table. It works similar to a book index — instead of scanning the entire table, the database uses the index to quickly locate the required data. However, indexes consume additional storage space and slow down write operations.


106. What is a clustered index?
a) An index that stores data in a separate structure from the table
b) An index that physically reorders the data in the table based on the indexed column
c) An index that allows multiple NULL values
d) An index used only for foreign keys

Ans. b
Explanation: A Clustered Index physically reorders the data rows in the table based on the indexed column's values. A table can have only one clustered index because the data can only be physically sorted in one order. The primary key of a table is typically the clustered index by default.


107. What is a non-clustered index?
a) An index that physically reorders table data
b) A separate structure that holds the index key and a pointer to the actual data row
c) An index that cannot be used with foreign keys
d) An index that only supports unique values

Ans. b
Explanation: A Non-Clustered Index is a separate structure from the table data that holds the index key values and pointers (row locators) to the actual data rows. Unlike clustered indexes, they do not physically reorder the data. A table can have multiple non-clustered indexes.


108. What is a stored procedure in SQL?
a) A virtual table in a database
b) A precompiled set of SQL statements stored in the database that can be executed repeatedly
c) A type of database constraint
d) A method of database backup

Ans. b
Explanation: A Stored Procedure is a precompiled set of one or more SQL statements stored in the database under a name and processed as a unit. It can accept input parameters, perform operations, and return output. Benefits include improved performance (precompiled), code reusability, reduced network traffic, and enhanced security.


109. What is a trigger in SQL?
a) A type of stored procedure that automatically executes in response to a specific database event
b) A type of SQL join
c) A constraint used for referential integrity
d) A type of database index

Ans. a
Explanation: A Trigger is a special type of stored procedure that automatically executes (fires) in response to specific events on a table or view, such as INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE operations. Triggers are used to enforce business rules, maintain audit trails, and ensure data integrity automatically.


110.What is a cursor in SQL?
a) A database constraint
b) A database object used to retrieve and process rows from a result set one at a time
c) A type of stored procedure
d) A method of database normalization

Ans. b
Explanation: A Cursor in SQL is a database object that allows retrieval and processing of rows from a result set one row at a time. It is used when row-by-row processing is required. Cursors have a performance overhead compared to set-based operations and should be used only when necessary.


111. Which of the following is true about the BCNF (Boyce-Codd Normal Form)?
a) It is a weaker version of 3NF
b) It is a stronger version of 3NF where every determinant must be a superkey
c) It deals only with multivalued dependencies
d) It only applies to relations with composite keys

Ans. b
Explanation: BCNF (Boyce-Codd Normal Form) is a stronger version of 3NF. A relation is in BCNF if for every non-trivial functional dependency X→Y, X must be a superkey. While 3NF allows non-superkey determinants if the dependent is a prime attribute, BCNF does not allow any such exception.


112. What is a functional dependency in DBMS?
a) A relationship between two tables
b) A constraint where the value of one attribute determines the value of another attribute
c) A type of SQL join
d) A method of database indexing

Ans. b
Explanation: A Functional Dependency (FD) is a constraint that describes a relationship between attributes in a relation. If attribute X functionally determines attribute Y (written as X→Y), it means for any two tuples with the same value of X, they must have the same value of Y. For example, employee_id → employee_name.


113. What is a partial dependency in DBMS?
a) A dependency where a non-prime attribute depends on the entire primary key
b) A dependency where a non-prime attribute depends on only a part of a composite primary key
c) A dependency where a prime attribute depends on a non-prime attribute
d) A dependency between two non-prime attributes

Ans. b
Explanation: A Partial Dependency occurs when a non-prime attribute (not part of any candidate key) depends on only a part of a composite primary key, rather than the whole key. Partial dependencies violate Second Normal Form (2NF). To eliminate partial dependencies, the relation must be decomposed into 2NF.
114. What is a transitive dependency in DBMS?
a) A dependency where attribute A depends on attribute B, and attribute B depends on attribute C, so A transitively depends on C
b) A dependency between a primary key and a foreign key
c) A dependency where all attributes depend on the entire primary key
d) A dependency specific to multivalued attributes

Ans. a
Explanation: A Transitive Dependency occurs when a non-prime attribute A depends on another non-prime attribute B (i.e., A→B and B→C, so A transitively depends on C through B). Transitive dependencies violate Third Normal Form (3NF). For example, if employee_id→department_id and department_id→department_name, then department_name is transitively dependent on employee_id.


115. Which of the following is the correct order of normalization?
a) 1NF → 3NF → 2NF → BCNF → 4NF
b) 1NF → 2NF → 3NF → BCNF → 4NF
c) 2NF → 1NF → BCNF → 3NF → 4NF
d) BCNF → 3NF → 2NF → 1NF → 4NF

Ans. b
Explanation: The correct order of normalization is 1NF → 2NF → 3NF → BCNF → 4NF → 5NF. Each higher normal form builds upon the previous one. 1NF eliminates repeating groups, 2NF eliminates partial dependencies, 3NF eliminates transitive dependencies, BCNF strengthens 3NF, and 4NF eliminates multivalued dependencies.


116. What is a shadow copy in DBMS?
a) A technique used for transaction recovery by maintaining a copy of the database
b) A type of database index
c) A method of query optimization
d) A type of SQL join

Ans. a
Explanation: Shadow Copy is a simple recovery technique used in DBMS where a copy (shadow) of the database is maintained before a transaction begins. If the transaction fails, the database is restored from the shadow copy. While simple to implement, it is not efficient for large databases.


117. What is the two-phase locking protocol (2PL)?
a) A protocol that allows transactions to acquire and release locks at any time
b) A concurrency control protocol where a transaction has a growing phase (acquires locks) and a shrinking phase (releases locks)
c) A protocol used only for read operations
d) A deadlock prevention technique that uses timestamps

Ans. b
Explanation: Two-Phase Locking (2PL) is a concurrency control protocol that ensures serializability. It has two phases: Growing phase (transaction can acquire locks but not release any) and Shrinking phase (transaction can release locks but not acquire any). Once a transaction releases its first lock, it enters the shrinking phase and cannot acquire new locks.


118. What is the difference between shared lock and exclusive lock?
a) Both locks allow read and write operations simultaneously
b) Shared lock allows multiple transactions to read; exclusive lock allows only one transaction to read or write
c) Shared lock allows write operations; exclusive lock allows only read operations
d) Both locks prevent all other transactions from accessing the data

Ans. b
Explanation: A Shared Lock (S-lock) allows multiple transactions to read a data item simultaneously but prevents any transaction from writing to it. An Exclusive Lock (X-lock) allows only one transaction to both read and write a data item, preventing all other transactions from accessing it in any mode. Exclusive locks are used for write operations.


119. Which of the following is a property of a lossless decomposition?
a) R1 ∪ R2 = R
b) R1 ∩ R2 = R
c) R1 ∩ R2 → R1 or R1 ∩ R2 → R2
d) Both A and C

Ans. d
Explanation: For a decomposition of relation R into R1 and R2 to be lossless, two conditions must hold: (1) R1 ∪ R2 = R (all attributes are preserved), and (2) R1 ∩ R2 → R1 or R1 ∩ R2 → R2 (the common attributes must be a superkey of at least one of the decomposed relations). This ensures the original relation can be reconstructed without spurious tuples.


120. What is a checkpoint in DBMS?
a) A point in time where all modified data in memory is written to disk and a log record is created
b) A type of database index
c) A method of query optimization
d) A type of SQL constraint

Ans. a
Explanation: A Checkpoint is a mechanism in DBMS where all modified (dirty) pages in the buffer are written to disk and a checkpoint record is written to the log. It is used to reduce recovery time after a system failure. During recovery, only transactions that were active after the last checkpoint need to be redone or undone.

121. What is a data dictionary in DBMS?
a) A physical storage of database records
b) A repository that stores metadata about the database structure, objects, and constraints
c) A type of SQL command
d) A method of database backup

Ans. b


122. Explanation: A Data Dictionary (also called system catalog or metadata repository) stores metadata — data about the data — including information about tables, columns, data types, constraints, indexes, users, and privileges. It is used by the DBMS itself to manage the database and is consulted during query processing and optimization.
What is query optimization in DBMS?
a) The process of writing SQL queries efficiently by the programmer
b) The process by which the DBMS selects the most efficient execution plan for a query
c) A method of database normalization
d) A technique for database backup

Ans. b
Explanation: Query Optimization is the process by which the DBMS's query optimizer selects the most efficient execution plan for a given SQL query from multiple possible plans. It considers factors like available indexes, table sizes, join methods, and access paths to minimize query execution time and resource usage.


123. What is the difference between UNION and UNION ALL in SQL?
a) UNION includes duplicates; UNION ALL removes duplicates
b) UNION removes duplicates; UNION ALL includes all rows including duplicates
c) Both are identical operations
d) UNION is used for tables; UNION ALL is used for views

Ans. b
Explanation: UNION combines the results of two SELECT statements and removes duplicate rows from the final result. UNION ALL combines the results of two SELECT statements and includes all rows, even duplicates. UNION ALL is faster than UNION because it skips the deduplication step.


124. What is a materialized view?
a) A virtual table that does not store data physically
b) A view that stores the query result physically on disk and is periodically refreshed
c) A type of SQL join
d) A method of database normalization

Ans. b
Explanation: A Materialized View is a database object that stores the result of a query physically on disk, unlike a regular view which is just a stored query. It improves query performance by precomputing and storing complex join or aggregation results. It needs to be periodically refreshed to reflect changes in the underlying base tables.


125. What is the purpose of the EXPLAIN command in SQL?
a) To execute a query and return results
b) To display the execution plan of a query without actually running it
c) To create an index on a table
d) To optimize a stored procedure

Ans. b
Explanation: The EXPLAIN command (or EXPLAIN PLAN in some databases) displays the execution plan that the query optimizer has chosen for a SQL query without actually executing it. It shows details like the join methods, index usage, table scan operations, and estimated costs, helping developers identify performance bottlenecks and optimize queries.


126. Which of the following is true about NULL values in SQL?
a) NULL is equal to zero
b) NULL is equal to an empty string
c) NULL represents an unknown or missing value and is not equal to anything, including itself
d) NULL values are always ignored in all SQL operations

Ans. c
Explanation: NULL in SQL represents an unknown, missing, or inapplicable value. It is not equal to zero, empty string, or even another NULL. Comparisons with NULL using = always return UNKNOWN (not TRUE or FALSE). To check for NULL values, you must use IS NULL or IS NOT NULL operators. Aggregate functions like SUM and COUNT ignore NULL values.


127. What is referential integrity in DBMS?
a) A constraint ensuring that every primary key value is unique
b) A constraint ensuring that a foreign key value must match an existing primary key value in the referenced table or be NULL
c) A constraint ensuring that all column values are of the correct data type
d) A constraint preventing duplicate rows in a table

Ans. b
Explanation: Referential Integrity is a database constraint that ensures every foreign key value in a table either matches an existing primary key value in the referenced table or is NULL. It maintains consistency between related tables and prevents orphan records. Violations can occur during INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE operations.


128. What is denormalization in DBMS?
a) The process of organizing data to reduce redundancy
b) The process of intentionally introducing redundancy into a database to improve read performance
c) The process of converting a database from one normal form to a lower one forcibly
d) A type of database backup technique

Ans. b
Explanation: Denormalization is the process of intentionally introducing redundancy into a normalized database to improve read query performance. By combining tables, adding redundant columns, or storing precomputed values, it reduces the number of joins required. It trades storage space and write performance for faster read operations, commonly used in data warehouses and reporting systems.


129. What is the purpose of the COALESCE function in SQL?
a) To count the number of non-NULL values in a column
b) To return the first non-NULL value from a list of expressions
c) To convert NULL values to zero
d) To merge two tables together

Ans. b
Explanation: The COALESCE function in SQL returns the first non-NULL value from a list of expressions. For example, COALESCE(NULL, NULL, 5, 10) returns 5 because it is the first non-NULL value. It is commonly used to handle NULL values by providing a default value when a column contains NULL.


130. What is an Entity-Relationship (ER) model?
a) A physical representation of database storage
b) A high-level conceptual data model that describes data and relationships between data in the real world
c) A type of SQL query
d) A method of database indexing

Ans. b
Explanation: An Entity-Relationship (ER) model is a high-level conceptual data model used to describe the data and the relationships between data in the real world. It uses entities (rectangles), attributes (ellipses), and relationships (diamonds) to visually represent the logical structure of a database before implementation.

131. What is a weak entity in an ER diagram?
a) An entity with a primary key
b) An entity that cannot be uniquely identified by its own attributes alone and depends on a strong entity
c) An entity with no attributes
d) An entity that has multiple relationships

Ans. b


132. Explanation: A Weak Entity is an entity that cannot be uniquely identified by its own attributes alone. It depends on a strong (identifying) entity for its existence and identification. It is represented by a double rectangle in ER diagrams. For example, a DEPENDENT entity depends on the EMPLOYEE entity. Its partial key combined with the parent's primary key forms its unique identifier.
What is a participation constraint in ER modeling?
a) A constraint that limits the number of attributes an entity can have
b) A constraint that specifies whether all or only some entity instances participate in a relationship
c) A constraint that prevents duplicate entities
d) A constraint that defines key attributes

Ans. b
Explanation: Participation Constraint specifies whether the existence of an entity depends on its being related to another entity through a relationship. Total Participation (double line) means every instance of the entity must participate in the relationship. Partial Participation (single line) means some instances may not participate. For example, every EMPLOYEE must work in a DEPARTMENT (total participation).


133. What is object-relational mapping (ORM)?
a) A method of database normalization
b) A technique that converts data between incompatible type systems in object-oriented programming languages and relational databases
c) A type of SQL join used for object databases
d) A method of database indexing for object types

Ans. b
Explanation: Object-Relational Mapping (ORM) is a programming technique that converts data between incompatible type systems — specifically between object-oriented programming languages and relational databases. It allows developers to interact with the database using objects instead of writing raw SQL. Popular ORM tools include Hibernate (Java), SQLAlchemy (Python), and Entity Framework (.NET).


134. What is a database transaction log?
a) A record of all user login activities in the database
b) A file that records all changes made to the database, used for recovery and auditing
c) A type of database index
d) A method of query optimization

Ans. b
Explanation: A Transaction Log (or redo log) is a file that sequentially records all changes (INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE) made to the database, along with before and after images of modified data. It is essential for database recovery after failures (crash recovery), point-in-time recovery, and replication. The log ensures durability and atomicity of transactions.


135. What is the difference between optimistic and pessimistic concurrency control?
a) Optimistic assumes conflicts are rare and checks for conflicts only at commit time; pessimistic assumes conflicts are frequent and locks data before accessing it
b) Optimistic locks data before access; pessimistic checks for conflicts only at commit time
c) Both use the same locking mechanism with different names
d) Optimistic is used for read operations only; pessimistic is used for write operations only

Ans. a
Explanation: Optimistic Concurrency Control assumes conflicts between transactions are rare. Transactions proceed without locking and check for conflicts only at commit time. If a conflict is detected, the transaction is rolled back. Pessimistic Concurrency Control assumes conflicts are frequent and locks data items before accessing them, preventing other transactions from accessing locked data until the lock is released.


136. What is a B+ tree index?
a) A binary search tree used for indexing
b) A balanced tree where all data records are stored at leaf nodes and leaf nodes are linked for efficient range queries
c) A hash-based index structure
d) A type of clustered index only

Ans. b
Explanation: A B+ Tree is an extension of a B-tree where all actual data records (or pointers to them) are stored only at leaf nodes, and internal nodes store only keys for navigation. All leaf nodes are linked together as a linked list, making range queries highly efficient. B+ trees are the most widely used index structure in relational databases like MySQL and PostgreSQL.


137. What is RAID in the context of database storage?
a) A type of SQL command for data replication
b) Redundant Array of Independent Disks — a technology that combines multiple disks to improve performance and/or fault tolerance
c) A database normalization technique
d) A method of query optimization

Ans. b
Explanation: RAID (Redundant Array of Independent Disks) is a storage technology that combines multiple physical disks into one logical unit to improve performance, increase storage capacity, and/or provide fault tolerance through redundancy. Different RAID levels (RAID 0, 1, 5, 6, 10) offer different trade-offs between performance, capacity, and fault tolerance. It is important in database systems for ensuring data availability and reliability.


138. What is a hash index in DBMS?
a) An index based on a tree structure
b) An index that uses a hash function to map search key values to bucket addresses for fast equality lookups
c) An index used only for primary keys
d) An index that stores data in sorted order

Ans. b
Explanation: A Hash Index uses a hash function to map search key values to bucket addresses, enabling very fast equality lookups (O(1) average time complexity). It is ideal for equality comparisons (=) but does not support range queries efficiently. Hash indexes are commonly used in in-memory databases and hash join operations.


139. What is serializability in DBMS?
a) A property ensuring transactions are executed in a fixed sequential order
b) A property ensuring that the concurrent execution of transactions produces the same result as some serial execution of those transactions
c) A property ensuring all transactions are committed in order
d) A property ensuring no two transactions can run simultaneously

Ans. b
Explanation: Serializability is a correctness criterion for concurrent transaction execution. A schedule is serializable if its outcome (effect on the database) is equivalent to some serial execution of the same transactions. It ensures database consistency in a concurrent environment without actually executing transactions serially, thereby maintaining both correctness and performance.


140. What is the difference between a primary index and a secondary index?
a) Primary index is built on a non-ordering field; secondary index is built on the ordering field
b) Primary index is built on the ordering key field of a sequentially ordered file; secondary index is built on a non-ordering field
c) Both are identical and can be used interchangeably
d) Primary index allows duplicates; secondary index does not

Ans. b
Explanation: A Primary Index is created on the ordering key field of a sequentially ordered (sorted) data file and has one index entry per disk block. A Secondary Index is created on a non-ordering field (or a non-key field) of the data file to provide an alternative access path. A table can have only one primary index but multiple secondary indexes.

141. What is a correlated subquery in SQL?
a) A subquery that executes independently of the outer query
b) A subquery that references columns from the outer query and executes once for each row processed by the outer query
c) A subquery that uses aggregate functions
d) A subquery that joins two or more tables

Ans. b
Explanation: A Correlated Subquery is a subquery that references one or more columns from the outer query. Unlike a non-correlated subquery that executes only once, a correlated subquery executes once for each row processed by the outer query, making it generally slower. For example, finding employees whose salary is greater than the average salary of their own department requires a correlated subquery that references the department of the current outer query row.


142. What is the difference between UNION and JOIN in SQL?
a) UNION combines rows from two tables horizontally; JOIN combines rows vertically
b) UNION combines result sets of two queries vertically (adding rows); JOIN combines columns from two tables horizontally based on a related column
c) Both UNION and JOIN perform identical operations
d) UNION is used for the same table; JOIN is used for different tables only

Ans. b
Explanation: UNION combines the result sets of two or more SELECT queries vertically by stacking rows on top of each other. Both queries must have the same number of columns with compatible data types. It removes duplicates by default (use UNION ALL to keep duplicates). JOIN combines columns from two or more tables horizontally based on a related column (join condition), creating wider rows with data from multiple tables. UNION increases the number of rows; JOIN increases the number of columns.

143. What is the difference between a view and a materialized view?
a) A view stores data physically; a materialized view does not store data
b) A view is a virtual table that executes its query each time it is accessed; a materialized view physically stores the query result and is periodically refreshed
c) Both views and materialized views store data physically
d) A view is used for OLAP systems; a materialized view is used for OLTP systems

Ans. b
Explanation: A regular View is a virtual table that does not store data physically. Every time the view is queried, the underlying SQL query is executed against the base tables, so it always returns up-to-date data. A Materialized View physically stores the result of the query on disk, similar to a cached copy. It offers much faster query performance since data is precomputed, but it may return slightly stale data until it is refreshed. Materialized views are commonly used in data warehouses and reporting systems for performance optimization.

144. What is the difference between a primary key and a unique key?
a) Primary key allows NULL values; unique key does not allow NULL values
b) Primary key does not allow NULL values and only one primary key per table; unique key allows one NULL value and multiple unique keys can exist per table
c) Both primary key and unique key are identical constraints
d) Primary key is used for foreign key references only; unique key is used for data integrity only

Ans. b
Explanation: A Primary Key uniquely identifies each row in a table, does not allow NULL values, and only one primary key can exist per table. It creates a clustered index by default. A Unique Key also enforces uniqueness of column values but allows one NULL value (in most databases) and multiple unique keys can exist in a single table. It creates a non-clustered index by default. Both can be referenced by foreign keys in other tables.

145. What is the difference between a clustered and non-clustered index in terms of performance?
a) Clustered index is always slower than non-clustered index
b) Clustered index is faster for range queries and sequential access since data is physically sorted; non-clustered index is faster for specific column lookups but requires an extra lookup step to retrieve full row data
c) Both clustered and non-clustered indexes have identical performance characteristics
d) Non-clustered index is faster for all types of queries compared to clustered index

Ans. b
Explanation: A Clustered Index physically sorts and stores data rows in the table based on the index key. It is very fast for range queries (BETWEEN, >, <) and sequential access since related data is physically adjacent on disk. A table can have only one clustered index. A Non-Clustered Index stores the index key and a pointer (row locator) to the actual data row in a separate structure. It requires an extra lookup step (key lookup or bookmark lookup) to retrieve the full row data after finding the index entry. It is efficient for specific equality lookups on non-primary key columns. Multiple non-clustered indexes can exist on a single table.

146. What is the difference between a natural join and an equi join?
a) Natural join requires explicit join condition; equi join automatically joins on all common columns
b) Natural join automatically joins on all columns with the same name and eliminates duplicate columns; equi join requires an explicit equality condition and may retain duplicate columns
c) Both natural join and equi join are identical operations
d) Natural join is used for three or more tables; equi join is used for two tables only

Ans. b
Explanation: A Natural Join automatically joins two tables on all columns that have the same name and compatible data types, and eliminates the duplicate columns from the result. It requires no explicit join condition. An Equi Join requires an explicit equality condition in the ON or WHERE clause (e.g., table1.id = table2.id) and retains both join columns in the result even if they have the same name. Natural join is cleaner but can be unpredictable if column names change; equi join is more explicit and controllable.

147. What is the purpose of the ROWNUM and ROW_NUMBER() in SQL?
a) ROWNUM and ROW_NUMBER() are identical functions
b) ROWNUM is a pseudocolumn in Oracle that assigns sequential numbers before sorting; ROW_NUMBER() is a window function that assigns sequential numbers after sorting within a partition
c) ROWNUM is used for pagination only; ROW_NUMBER() is used for ranking only
d) Both are used exclusively for deleting duplicate rows

Ans. b
Explanation: ROWNUM is a pseudocolumn in Oracle that assigns sequential row numbers to rows as they are retrieved from the database, before any ORDER BY sorting is applied. This can lead to unexpected results if not used carefully with subqueries. ROW_NUMBER() is an ANSI standard window function that assigns a unique sequential integer to each row within a result set or partition, after the ORDER BY clause is applied. ROW_NUMBER() is more predictable and flexible, supporting pagination, ranking, and duplicate detection across all major databases.

148. What is the difference between optimistic locking and pessimistic locking?
a) Optimistic locking locks data before reading; pessimistic locking locks data only at commit time
b) Optimistic locking assumes conflicts are rare, does not lock data during transaction, and checks for conflicts only at commit time; pessimistic locking assumes conflicts are frequent and locks data immediately when it is read to prevent other transactions from modifying it
c) Both optimistic and pessimistic locking use identical mechanisms
d) Optimistic locking is used only for read operations; pessimistic locking is used only for write operations

Ans. b
Explanation: Optimistic Locking assumes that conflicts between concurrent transactions are rare. It does not lock the data during the transaction. Instead, it checks at commit time whether the data has been modified by another transaction since it was read (usually using a version number or timestamp). If a conflict is detected, the transaction is rolled back and retried. It is best suited for low-contention environments. Pessimistic Locking assumes conflicts are frequent and immediately locks data when it is read, preventing other transactions from modifying it until the lock is released. It is suited for high-contention environments but reduces concurrency.

149. What is the difference between SAVEPOINT and ROLLBACK in SQL transactions?
a) SAVEPOINT permanently saves transaction changes; ROLLBACK temporarily saves changes
b) SAVEPOINT sets a named point within a transaction to which partial rollback is possible; ROLLBACK undoes all changes either to the beginning of the transaction or to a specified savepoint
c) Both SAVEPOINT and ROLLBACK perform identical operations
d) SAVEPOINT is used to commit partial transactions; ROLLBACK is used to undo committed transactions

Ans. b
Explanation: A SAVEPOINT sets a named marker within a transaction that allows partial rollback to that specific point without undoing the entire transaction. For example, SAVEPOINT sp1 marks a point in the transaction. ROLLBACK undoes transaction changes — ROLLBACK TO sp1 undoes only the changes made after savepoint sp1 while keeping earlier changes, while a plain ROLLBACK (without specifying a savepoint) undoes all changes made since the transaction began. Savepoints are useful for complex transactions where only a portion needs to be undone on error.


150. What is the difference between a hash join and a nested loop join?
a) Hash join is always faster than nested loop join for all cases
b) Hash join builds a hash table on the smaller table and probes it with the larger table, efficient for large unsorted datasets; nested loop join iterates each row of the outer table against all rows of the inner table, efficient for small datasets or when the inner table has an index
c) Both hash join and nested loop join use identical algorithms
d) Hash join is used only for equality conditions; nested loop join is used only for non-equality conditions

Ans. b
Explanation: A Hash Join works by building a hash table on the smaller (build) table using the join key, then scanning the larger (probe) table and looking up matching rows in the hash table. It is highly efficient for large, unsorted datasets and equality joins but requires significant memory. A Nested Loop Join iterates over each row of the outer table and for each row, scans the entire inner table (or uses an index) to find matching rows. It is efficient for small datasets, when the inner table has an index on the join key, or for non-equality join conditions. The query optimizer chooses the appropriate join method based on table sizes, indexes, and available memory.


151. What is the difference between an implicit and explicit transaction in SQL?
a) Implicit transactions are manually started by the user; explicit transactions are automatically managed by the DBMS
b) Implicit transactions are automatically started and committed by the DBMS for each SQL statement; explicit transactions are manually controlled by the user using BEGIN TRANSACTION, COMMIT, and ROLLBACK statements
c) Both implicit and explicit transactions use identical control mechanisms
d) Implicit transactions support savepoints; explicit transactions do not support savepoints

Ans. b
Explanation: An Implicit Transaction is automatically started and committed by the DBMS for each individual SQL statement. Every DML statement (INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE) is automatically wrapped in its own transaction and committed immediately upon successful execution. An Explicit Transaction is manually controlled by the user who explicitly starts the transaction with BEGIN TRANSACTION (or BEGIN), groups multiple SQL statements together, and explicitly ends it with COMMIT (to save all changes) or ROLLBACK (to undo all changes). Explicit transactions are essential for ensuring atomicity across multiple related SQL statements.


152. What is the difference between a full table scan and an index scan in SQL query execution?
a) Full table scan is always faster than index scan
b) Full table scan reads every row in the table sequentially; index scan uses an index to quickly locate specific rows, generally faster for selective queries but may be slower for queries returning large portions of the table
c) Both full table scan and index scan use identical execution strategies
d) Index scan is always faster than full table scan for all types of queries


Ans. b
Explanation: A Full Table Scan reads every row in the table sequentially from start to end. It is efficient when a query retrieves a large percentage of rows (typically more than 10-20% of the table) or when no suitable index exists. An Index Scan uses an index to quickly locate specific rows matching the search condition without reading the entire table. It is efficient for highly selective queries that retrieve a small percentage of rows. However, for queries returning a large portion of the table, the overhead of index lookups (reading index pages + data pages) can make a full table scan faster. The query optimizer decides which method to use.













